---
layout: post
title: "The economics of Indian growth"
date: 2015-02-04
---

###Overview: 

India’s history and path to growth have differentiated it from other developing nations in Asia and across the world. While the country has always been rooted in its steadfast belief in democracy and self-reliance since independence from Britain, it's economic policies have been anything but rooted.  India has gone through a myriad of contrasting economic policies since its independence. They have changed over the times in response to politics and changing leadership. 

In this essay, I explore the shifting economic landscape of India during the 1980s and the 1990s. Essentially, I contend that despite containing elements of liberalization, the new economic policies of the 1980s were essentially pro-business, and resulted ultimately in a surge of indigenous private sector growth. Moreover, I argue that the post 1990s “liberalization” was actually more so a continuation of the policies of the previous decade, than a radical departure as generally perceived.  In this period, I maintain that the unusual mixture of liberalization with pro-growth sympathies remnant in leadership resulted in the modest growth pattern of the 1990s and 2000s. Since I seek to study economic policies and their consequences, I will generally avoid discussion on the political causes of these changes despite their fundamental importance to a full understanding of India’s growth trajectory. For each of these time periods, I will discuss the characterizing trends of the economic reforms, followed by the economic consequences of the reforms. 
      
###1980s: ###

Approximately around the late 1970s or early 1980s, Indian economic policies took a sharp turn from the socialism that Indira Gandhi and the Congress Party had ostensibly championed throughout the previous decades. Numerous scholars believe that with Indira Gandhi’s re-election after the Emergency period, there was a fundamental shift in the attitude of the leadership towards economic policy, specifically one that prioritized growth and abandoned socialism.  Essentially, we will see that a pro-growth government that served the interests of business (especially large firms) dictated Indian economic policy during the 1980s. 

The first major area of economic change geared towards growth of business revolved around new freedoms given to companies in the private sector to expand and diversify. The previous fifteen years had been characterized by tight controls on businesses across all sectors. Licensing was required for most industries, and multiple “Schedules” within industrial policy laws mandated which businesses could produce what, and strictly limited diversification and expansion of firms (Panagariya 78). Three phases of deregulation in 1975-79, 1979-84, and 1985-89 progressively removed requirements for licensing and approvals, granted increasing capacity extensions, and allowed businesses to diversify their mixture of products (Panagariya 79). 

While it may seem that this deregulation was clearly pro-market, as many neoliberal scholars argue, a closer look at the policies reveals growth-oriented interventionism by the government. For instance, the government removed anti-monopoly legislation intended to maintain a fair playing field in the economy, in order to support the growth of big business.  The Monopoly and Trade Restrictions (MRTP) Act that capped the growth of big business was effectively “diluted” (Kohli 102). Even Panagariya, who interprets the reforms as evidence of pro-market liberalization, notes that the asset limit above which firms were subject to MRTP regulations was raised from 200 million to 1 billion rupees, and that MRTP firms in many industries were entirely exempt from industrial licensing provided that they were located 100 km from large cities (Panagariya 83). In addition, expansionary fiscal policy was practiced that specifically benefited large businesses.  The government “liberalized credit for big borrowers, altered legal framework, and provided incentives to encourage the private sector to finance new investment by raising resources directly from the public (Kohli 103).” 

The other major economic policy trend during this time period was the unilateral liberalization of trade. Foremost, there was a relaxation in licensing of imports, characterized by removing license requirements on imports in favor of helping businesses grow. Starting in 1979, products that were not produced domestically were put on the “Open General Licensing” list, which meant that companies no longer required licenses to import them (Panagariya 86).  Again, while some scholars argue that this deregulation on imports was an experiment in pro-market policy, it is critical to note the clearly pro-business interventionist policies in the periphery. While barriers on imports that domestic producers needed (and weren’t being produced within India) were lowered, high tariffs remained and were generally increased throughout the 1980s on products with domestic competing counterparts (Panagariya 89). Finally, in the most apparent acts of intervention, the government also engaged in the “picking of winners” by providing replenishment licenses to export-oriented producers, which allowed holders to freely import items on the “restricted” list of imports (Panagariya 88).  

Several statistics indicate that the direct effects of deregulatory policy and lifted restrictions on imports were positive, as expected. Most generally, the number of private companies grew at rate of 13.5% (Kohli 109) during the 1980s, indicating the ease of entry of firms into the markets thanks to elimination of licensing requirements. Between 1983 and 1986, the percentage of license applications approved for MRTP firms seeking new undertakings increased from 17.1% to 32.3% (Panagariya 84), proving the friendlier attitude towards big business. With the liberalized import policies, imports on the OGL list increased from 5% to 30% of total imports between 1980-81 and 1987-88 (Panagariya 88). 

Looking at the broader economic consequences, although it is impossible to legitimately map causal relationships between policy changes and the performance of the economy, it is likely that the aforementioned economic policies of the 1980s fostered the growth of India’s indigenous private sector. The 1980s marked a resounding upward shift in GDP growth, with an average growth rate of 5.8% between 1980 and 1990, compared to the previous GDP growth rate between 1965-1979 of 2.9% (Kohli). A more illuminating statistic is that between 1988 and 1991, when the economic policies of the 1980s had fully matured and manifested themselves in implementation, the average GDP growth rate was 7.6% (Panagariya 8). Simultaneously, the notable increase in the private sector’s contribution to gross capital formation (Kohli 109) connotes private sector growth in particular. According to the Government of India, gross fixed private investment as a proportion of GDP rose steadily from 10.2% to 13.9% between 1986-87 and 1990-91 (Panagariya 101).  Although Panagariya deems the growth during the 1980s as the “triumph of liberalization” in his book, as I have made clear, it is truly the triumph of pro-growth policies that included elements of liberalization. Finally, it would be remiss not to mention that while the highly expansionary fiscal policy of the 1980s, which included both lines of credit for big businesses and reduced taxes for the middle class to increase demand, helped contribute to the growth in incomes and capital investment during this time, it also led to the balance of payments crisis that India faced in 1991.
      
###1990s:

The general “liberalizing” economic reforms of the 1990s are more straightforward to discuss than the reforms of the previous decade. Essentially, many areas of the regulatory framework that were progressively loosened throughout the 1980s were now finally removed altogether and replaced by market mechanisms. For instance, the regulatory and licensing framework for companies was dismantled. Additionally licensing requirements for investment and public monopolies over multiple sectors were also removed (Panagariya 103). The government swiftly began removing import licenses and quotas, and by 2001 they were gone entirely (Kohli 112). Also, restrictions on exports were largely removed and the currency was devalued (Panagariya 106). Overall, while the changes of the 1991 reforms were indeed significant, they were largely just the final big steps, a “removal of training wheels,” of the economic policy adjustments that had been ongoing throughout the previous decade.

One area of policy change in the 1990s that appears to have been a stark departure from the status quo of the 1980s was foreign investment. Beginning in 1991, there was a gradual liberalization of the foreign investment regime steadily continued by the prime ministers of India through the 2000s. The previous decade, in contrast, saw only minor improvements in policy regarding foreign investment (Panagariya 92), with the restrictive FERA system remaining in place. However, the absence of policy change does not tell the whole story! Despite the lack of change in policy, available evidence suggests that in practice foreign investment restrictions were relaxed and approvals were streamlined during the 1980s. The average number of approvals of foreign collaboration tripled from 242 to 744 during 1980-88, and the average value of foreign investment approved per year increased over 17 times from Rs. 53 million to Rs. 930 million (Panagariya 92). Therefore, I believe that the government was quietly testing the waters to look at the merits of increased foreign collaboration. With this understanding, we see that the beginning of gradual foreign liberalization in 1991 is more a continuity than a change from the 1980s. 

While the government was clearly putting pressure on businesses to be more competitive through the 1991 reforms, it did not suddenly relinquish its pro-business sympathies as is commonly interpreted to be the case.  In fact, the liberalization of the 1990s actually came with the grudging approval of business (Kohli). In his case study of the automobile industry in India, Kohli notes that after the 1990s reforms when the fear of imports mobilized Indian automobile manufacturers, the Indian state “obliged,” adding a variety of new customs duties on imports in order to protect them (114). Overall, unlike the other kinds of aforementioned regulations that were removed rapidly, tariffs on imports were reduced much more gradually. Finally, although he does not specifically detail what kinds of pro-growth policies remained intact, Kohli notes the growing level of concentration in private industry and the investment boom in the “registered sector” as evidence of the continued business-friendly policies of government and their positive effects during the 1990s (115).  Therefore, I characterize the economic policies of 1990s as significantly liberal but still pro-business as before. 

The economic consequences of the 1990s reforms were interesting, and not as expected. As before, I will begin with specifics and then move on to broader economic results. First, despite the removal of restrictions on exports and the devaluation of currency, the exports of goods and services as a proportion of GDP had risen only a single percent (from 9% to 10%) between 1991 and 1999. In contrast they had grown from 6% to 9% between 1988 and 1981 (Panagariya 261). Similarly, in spite of the steady liberalization of foreign investment, DFI has only really begun growing in the mid 2000s, and is still less than 10% that of the DFI in China (Panagariya 263). Thirdly, industrial growth did not exceed the rate achieved during the 1980s, and neither did growth in total factor productivity (Kohli 114). Unlike in the 1980s, the specific economic policy changes didn’t have the expected effects on the economy.

Economic analysis helps lead us to the conclusion that the growth during this period can be more likely attributed to pro-business policies than liberalization. Overall, the rate of GDP growth between 1991 and 2008 has been a steady and modest 6.4%. This is interesting because it indicates that while India’s liberalizing reforms didn’t lead to acceleration of growth, at the same time India’s growth wasn’t hurt by neoliberalism as has occurred in Latin American countries (Kohli 114). Since we know from the above paragraph that liberalization had unimpressive impacts on exports, foreign investment, and industrial growth in India, Kohli’s attribution of sustained buoyancy of private sector investment throughout the 1990s and 2000s to growth seems valid (115). We know that this capital formation, in turn, was aided by the business-friendly nature of the government. Opponents of such a view might argue that India failed to accelerate because of the incompleteness of liberalization and the persistence of pro-business intervention. However, such a view is simply overly optimistic about liberalization and ignores fundamental realities in India. First, given India’s roots in indigenous capital as well its currently unfavorable infrastructure for foreigners, it is unlikely that complete liberalization would suddenly bring in investment.  Secondly, given India’s current lag in competitive advantage against Asian giants such as China in critical areas such as manufacturing  (China has simply had a significant head start), a lack of government support would render it especially unable to compete, at least for a long time. India needs more government support to build up a competitive manufacturing industry.  All in all, whatever one’s views might be on the economic effects of liberalization versus intervention, it seems clear that the mixture between liberalization and some pro-business economic policies in India resulted in the uniquely modest growth rate of India throughout the 1990s. 
      
###Conclusion:

Overall, I have argued that while the extent of liberalization in the Indian economy differed between the 1980s and the 1990s, both periods of Indian growth were fundamentally characterized by common growth-oriented, pro-business economic policies. The first round of economic reform in the 1980s, characterized by deregulation of industries, friendlier import policies, and expansionary fiscal policy, led to significant economic growth especially towards the end of the decade. The more liberalizing reforms in the 1990s led to continued growth, albeit modest, which through my economic analysis I find driven more by the remnant pro-business policies than by liberalization. The economic progress of India, up so far, has been no doubt unique, and it will be interesting to see how it continues to play out with the new leadership of today. 

###Works Cited:

*Kohli, Atul. Poverty Amid Plenty in the New India. New York: Cambridge UP, 2012. Print. 

*Panagariya, Arvind. India: The Emerging Giant. New York: Oxford UP, 2010. Print. 

      
      
      

