---
layout: post
title: "Authoritarianism and Development"
date: 2015-01-24
---

##Authoritarianism and Development for Growth: Deriving Insights from the stories of China, India, and South Korea

*This essay is derived from a paper I wrote for a class I took on Asian economic development.

###Overview

China, India, and South Korea have experienced periods of dynamic growth during the second half of the 20th century, and continue to grow today. China has averaged a GDP growth rate of around 8% each year, for the last 30 years. In the same period, India’s annual growth rate has averaged a more modest 6%. During Korea’s economic transformation in the 1960s and 1970s, it averaged a growth rate of over  9%. Numerous factors can affect a country’s economic performance over a specified period: “world economic conditions, resource endowments, differing starting points, demographic factors, national price regimes, patterns of savings, culture, levels of technology, entrepreneurship, etc” (Kohli, “State Directed Development” 3). 

From our study of these Asian nations during POL 377, however, we know that pro-business intervention by the state, to varying extents, was fundamental to the growth of all three. While the nature of the state and characteristics of intervention differed, the governments of all three nations put forth numerous reforms and policies that were designed, explicitly or implicitly, to help businesses grow. In Korea, the state selected industries that would grow and channeled them credit, heavily incentivized domestic savings, and repressed labor to support export oriented growth. In China, TVEs were privatized and special economic zones for foreign investment were created. In India, stifling regulations were lifted while selective import tariffs were maintained to promote indigenous growth. Therefore, it makes sense to regard the state as a focal point if one wants to determine the origins and differences in growth between the three nations. India, of course, was always a democracy, while China and South Korea were run under authoritarian rule. Kohli dubs the Korean developmental state as soft-authoritarian and the Chinese state as hard-authoritarian (“Lecture Notes”). 

Many scholars and students of political economy believe that authoritarianism is necessary for rapid growth (Dick 818). According to Jagadish Bhagwati, the “political economy of development poses, in this respect, a cruel choice between rapid expansion and democratic processes (Dick 817).” Mancur Olson argues that democracy leads to interest-oriented policies instead of efficient policy making (Kohli, “Lecture Notes”). In this essay, I look at the connection between authoritarianism and the developmental state by focusing on the history of economic growth in India, China, and South Korea. By recalling trends that I have learned throughout class and through some perhaps sweeping comparisons, I find relationships between the nature of government and generation of pro-business economic policy (and thus growth). I make the fundamental assumption throughout this paper that passage of pro-business economic policy is equivalent to economic growth. 

I will argue in this essay that the authoritarian regimes of Korea and China were able to generate significantly more economic reform policies and could implement such policies more effectively than the government of India. Additionally, Korea and China and were able to pass more controversial reforms.  I also find that India during its highest growth phase was rather authoritarian, while the regimes in both China and Korea contained some elements of democracy, leading me to believe that the lack of binarity in the nature of the three governments was a contributor to their growths. Ultimately, while not necessary to achieve growth in the long-run, I find that well-run authoritarian regimes can accelerate the growth process and rates of growth, and even lead to more equitable growth. 

###Frequency of Economic Reforms

When we look at the economic policy reforms that came both out of China and Korea, compared to those of India, we see that reforms were simply generated faster and more frequently by the Chinese and Korean states. Once certain leaders at the apex of the Chinese political structure decided they wanted to make some reform, policy generation went blazingly fast, “cascading from the top echelons of the party with a speed and scope that outraced China’s capacity to keep up” (Lieberthal 130). This rapid change can be illustrated by reforms towards inviting in foreign aid, after leaders at the apex agreed that it would be good for China’s growth (Naughton 104).  In early 1977, China had a strict ban on any foreign loans or investment. By spring of 1977, the government was willing to take “credit in the form of long term deferred payment for imports”. By the summer a couple months later, loans from private foreign sources were accepted outright. By the fall of 1978, China was accepted foreign aid, and by winter a few months later, laws were passed to permit foreign direct investment. By the end of 1978, Beijing announced that it would bring in $40 billion of foreign investment (Lieberthal 130).  Both Guthrie and Lieberthal note the immense policy effects that a single powerful apex member of the party could have (Lieberthal 137, Guthrie 97). For example, Zhao Zhiyang took charge of the entire SEZ and coastal development policy, which rapidly built SEZs and an entirely new set of laws for these zones. While, for the sake of conciseness I will not illustrate the swiftness of Korean policy changes in such detail, Korean policy moved just as fast, if not faster. A couple examples of rapid change include the devaluation of the Korean won by more than 50% in just two years in the early 1960s, and the “Big Push” of the 1970s, in which the government massively subsidized and directed a transition from light to heavy industry, changing the entire direction of the Korean economy, within less then a decade. Between 1972 and 1979, the share of heavy industry in manufacturing imports increased by 15% (Woo 133). Overall, the concentration of power at the apex of both the Chinese and Korean political structures enabled reforms to be generated and processed quickly.

Reforms in India occurred at a much slower pace. This is not unexpected, given the nature of democracy. As is typical, legislation in a democratic government does not pass without the scrutinization and approval of those in the legislature. Indian political system Chains of patronage linking political officials, land-owning village-leaders, and the poor characterized the Indian political system (Kohli). In return for votes, members of legislature had to cater to the special interests of those who kept them and power, and were always looking for ways to gain immediate benefit for their clients. Therefore, the system often prioritized short-term consumption and personal interests over the long term good of the country (Kohli), in a classic problem that plagues most democracies. The general implication of the system was the delayed emergence of a growth oriented state and a general lag in reforms of any kind. The 1960s and 1970s in India were devoid of reform. Kohli notes that leadership under Indira Gandhi was a classic example of how democracies could prioritize politics over national development. The roots of Gandhi’s power were shallow, with the New Congress party lacking any coherent ideology, and all of Gandhi’s followers eld together by little more than her leadership appeal and vague populist promises (Kohli, “Poverty Amid Plenty” 25). Gandhi would often politicize policies, “filtering her policy choices through the prism of maintaining her personal grip on power …leading to an era of missed economic opportunities (Kohli, “Poverty Amid Plenty” 86).” Even at its most unified and growth-oriented state in the 1980s, reforms in India were slower than those in Korea and China. The progress of the deregulation on companies reflects such progress. Three phases of deregulation in 1975-79, 1979-84, and 1985-89, progressively removed requirements for licensing and approvals, granted increasing capacity extensions, and allowed businesses to diversify their mixture of products (Panagariya 79). Each phase consisted of an industrial policy statement issued at the beginning of the phase, followed by several years of waiting for implementation (Panagariya 79). While this deregulation was critical to the high growth of the India during the 1980s, when we take into account the 14-year timespan for the passage of 3 laws and the fact that the reforms involved simply removing existing legislation, they pale in comparison to the magnitude of Chinese and Korean reforms. The slower, steadier nature of any kind of reform in India (whether it was socialist or liberalizing in spirit) countered the rapid progress of the Chinese and Korean developmental states.

One might raise the point, here, that the frequency of reforms is not indicative of their impact in creating a successful growth state. Intuitively, it makes sense that the quality of the reforms and the amount of thought that goes into them is more paramount. But such thinking is simply untrue in the context of development in India and China. Both China and India were following a “groping for stones” model of development, which meant that since they wanted achieve growth but weren’t exactly sure how, they intended to try out various reform policies and see what worked. As Liebenthal observes, in such a model of development, frequency of reform passage is critical towards actually making developmental progress (137).  The fastest approach to growth is the rapid passage of different policies and then the adherence to those that work best. If policies are not passed quickly, such a trial and error approach ends up leaving the country stuck in the “trials” phase rather than making progress towards growth. 

###Implementation of Reforms

The authoritarian governments of China and Korea not only passed more reforms and legislation, but also created more efficient vessels of state power to implement such reforms (and even force them on society, if need be). Park Chung Hee established the KCIA and re-established the Korean bureaucracy soon after coming into power, and used these bodies throughout his rule to keep tabs on the state of the nation, make sure that policies were being implemented, and even shut down possible threats to his power (Kohli, “Lecture Notes”). Although Park was fortunate to have inherited these structures from Japanese colonial rule, it was his authoritarian rule that kept them as subservient agents of the developmental state. Similarly, while Mao Zedong’s authoritarian rule wreaked havoc on China, it undeniably created a consolidated state with a national police force and centralized bureaucracy that made sure that policies of the Cultural Revolution and Great Leap Forward were being implemented. China continued to to be under control of such a police state during the reforms under Deng. This bureaucracy was the vehicle of reform implementation under Deng.

India’s democratic structure, in contrast, has led to poor policy implementation for multiple reasons.  First, because of a lack of hierarchy and formal structure in legislature, it is not possible in India to have a reform implemented by channeling it downstream through through the leadership, as we have noted was the case in both China and Korea. For example, Kohli writes that because of a poorly organized support structure, Indira Gandhi’s populist policies not only hurt the economy, but also provided no significant gains for India’s poor (Kohli, “Poverty Amid Plenty” 26). Secondly, India’s bureaucracy has been characteristically ineffective. To this day, India is infamous for the corruption and general inefficiency that plagues all aspects of the Indian bureaucracy. While we cannot directly attribute India’s bureaucratic flaws to a democratic structure of government, it suffices to say that under authoritarian rule it would have been much easier to streamline and discipline the bureaucracy, as was done under the harsh hands of Mao and Park. Under India’s democracy, the bureaucracy has become a power of its own, collecting rents and creating uneven implementation, rather than an orderly subordinate that carries out the laws put before it. Finally, federalism in India has caused reform implementation to be devolved to the states, where it varies on a state by state basis. The autonomy given to states was directly the result of India’s democracy - it was a concession that Nehru strongly opposed but eventually gave in to due to widespread demand (Kohli, “Lecture Notes”). 

Kohli argues that the very fact that all 3 countries, under 3 differing government types, were able to achieve high growth is itself evidence that regime type doesn’t matter (“Lecture Notes”). However, India’s growth rates have been generally lower than those of both China and Korea, likely because of fewer and less effectively implemented pro-business reforms, which in turn I have explained are due to India’s non-authoritarian developmental state.  An astute critic might counter my counterargument by noting that during the late 1980s, India had a growth rate averaging 7.8% (Panagariya 8), nearing that of authoritarian China and Korea. It turns out, however, that during the preceding years leading up to this growth, India’s government was at its most authoritarian, pro-growth point in history. In January 1980, Indira Gandhi was re-elected to leadership with a resounding victory, after being ousted and replaced by a Janata party majority. Several things were now drastically different with respect to her leadership. First, she had overwhelming support in Parliament. Secondly, having already destroyed the Syndicate within her own party having put other opposition into the Congress(O) party, Indira now enjoyed unanimous support within her own party. Finally, Indira Gandhi seemed to have abandoned her Socialist ideologies for a more pragmatic, pro-growth platform (Panagariya 51). Panagariya maintains that these dynamics gave her a “decisive role in shaping economic policies,” and that this support was transferred to Rajiv Gandhi after Indira’s assassination in 1984 (Rajiv was elected with a 3/4 majority in Parliament). Essentially, in the 1980s, both Gandhis had near full control of the government and shared an increasingly pragmatic, pro-growth mindset. The rapid growth by the end of the 1980s was thus a result of a combination of reforms generated by this regime. India’s most active developmental state was created when the democratic government of India was at, so to speak, its most authoritarian point. 

###More Controversial Reforms

Up so far, I have argued in a couple of different ways that authoritarian regimes in India and China were a boost to the growth process, rather than any sort of completely transformationally factor. However, authoritarian regimes enable certain growth-oriented policy changes that simply can not be brought about in a democracy. The fundamental difference that authoritarian regimes bring to the table in developmental transformation is an enablement of controversial changes that involve major sacrifices today to beget long term growth down the road. Park’s regime in Korea successfully repressed labor through nationalism and close supervision, thus getting workers to work at below market wage and making exports from Korea more competitive. Land reforms are another such example - the massive wresting away and redistribution of land from landed classes can not typically happen under democratic rule. In China, massive land reforms had been brought forth by Mao that upturned the landowning class and gave lands to the poor. Later, during Deng’s leadership, these lands were decollectivized giving many Chinese peasants what was essentially private ownership of plots of land. In both Korea and China, a landowning peasant class in the countryside drove agricultural growth, and thus shared in the prosperity of the overall economic growth. Although land reforms were attempted in India, unsurprisingly, not much came out of them. The result is that agricultural growth was poor and rural poverty was high in many areas across India. 

###Insights on Development

The purpose of this paper was to infer how democratic and authoritarian developmental states might differ in their ability to engender economic growth, by specifically comparing and contrasting the nature of the state and economic policy outcomes in China, Korea, and India. Through this localized study, I came to the conclusion that the authoritarian developmental states of China and Korea generated more economic reforms, and implemented the reforms more effectively than the democratic state of India. The Chinese and Korean states were also able to mandate land reforms and repress labor, two things that India’s democracy wasn’t really capable of achieving.

However, the purpose of this paper, for me and hopefully for the reader as well, is to gain at least some broader generalized insights about development in the future. The conclusion that I reached from my localized study definitely does not imply more broadly that authoritarian states are unequivocally better than democratic states for development. Any critic would simply have to recall that more often that not, authoritarian regimes in developing nations tend to fail miserably, often leaving the country damaged rather than creating an inkling of growth. The more relevant question for future work and to gain some practical knowledge from the localized study of regimes of China and Korea, is, what kept these authoritarian regimes focused on growth  and prevented them from falling apart? Of course, foremost, it was fortunate that both the top leadership in the Chinese party system and Park Chung Hee were highly capable, honest, patriotic individuals, who prioritized the success of their nation over all other goals. 

The interesting trend I notice is that both the Chinese and South Korean authoritarian states contained elements of democracy. In China during the reform era under Deng, the leaders at the apex of the party structure each had their own patronage networks and thus protected certain social groups and interests across the nation (Naughton 105). Naughton observes that these leaders refused to sacrifice the interests of any of those they were represented, and thus refused policies that would create any “losers” in society. Thus a group of around a dozen leaders actually represented most of the interests in China.  In South Korea, there was a pressure from both the international sphere and from the student populations in Seoul on Park to do well for the state and protect certain interests (Amsden 48). In fact, Park’s assassination came at a time of intense protest against his rule by young students who felt that he was no longer serving the best interests of the nation. Encyclopedia Britannica defines “authoritarianism” in a governmental context as any political system that concentrates power in the hands of a leader or a small elite, that is not constitutionally responsible to the body of the people. In both the authoritarian regimes of China and Korea, while power was indeed consolidated at the top, the regimes were in fact, to at least some degree, responsible to the people. The ability to artificially create authoritarian developmental states with such democratic pressures might be a key to unlocking the developmental potential of future nations.  

###References

*Amsden, Alice. Asia’s Next Giant: South Korea and Late Industrialization. Cambridge: Oxford Press, 1992

*Dick, William. “Authoritarian vs. Nonauthoritarian Approaches to Economic Development.” Journal of Political Economy. 82, 4 (2013): 817-827. Online.

*Guthrie, Doug. China and Globalization: The Social, Economic and Political Transformation of Chinese Society. New York: Routledge, 2009. 

*Kohli, Atul. Lecture Notes. Personal collection of Atul Kohli. Princeton University, NJ. 

*Kohli, Atul. Poverty Amid Plenty in the New India. New York: Cambridge UP, 2012. Print. 

*Kohli, Atul. State Directed Development. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2004. Print.

*Naughton, Barry. “A Political Economy of China’s Economic Transition.” China’s Great Economic Transformation. New York: Cambridge UP, 2008.

*Panagariya, Arvind. India: The Emerging Giant. New York: Oxford UP, 2010. Print. 

*Woo, Jung-en. Race to the Swift: State and Finance in Korean Industrialization New York: Columbia University Press, 1991.